Typically, regulation
of payment systems
focuses principally
on issues of first,
fairness, by disallowing
certain practices
that feel unfair or abusive.
Issues of transparency,
by making the fees
and rates associated with credit
and debit cards more transparent,
so consumers understand how
much they're actually paying,
and consumers understand how
much merchants are
actually getting.
Issues of overall risk,
by ensuring that for example,
consumer credit is
appropriately allocated so that
systemic risk of
overall financial crisis
is substantially reduced.
Following the financial crisis,
there has been
quite substantial regulation
of both debit and
credit cards along the lines
of the issues of fairness,
transparency, and systemic risks
that we've discussed.
With respect to debit cards,
in the decade leading up
to the financial crisis,
the fastest growing source
of revenue for
financial institutions was from
fees that they collected
from their customers.
These fees included for example,
overdraft fees that are
charged to consumers
who unwittingly overdraw
on their accounts.
When overdraft was first
introduced as a product,
the way that banks decided
whether they would complete
the transaction and charge
consumers an overdraft fee,
or decline the
transaction and simply
refuse to let it be
processed with this
payment instrument,
was on a case-by-case basis
determined by the nature
of the consumer
that they were dealing
with and also the nature
and size of the
transaction itself.
In the decade leading
up to the crisis,
what banks realized
with the help of
third-party vendors who
emerged in this space,
was that, overdraft could be
a really profitable
revenue source
for financial institutions.
If they instead of discouraging
consumers from relying on
overdraft for example,
by in some instances declining
these transactions or on
a case-by-case basis,
instead encouraging consumers
to turn to overdraft as
a product with a series of
practices that we now think
of as rather nefarious.
For example, what became
commonplace in the period
leading up to the crisis,
was for banks to order
your transactions in
a way that made it
most likely for you to incur
the maximal overdraft fees.
For example, imagine that
you wake up in
the morning and you're
the kind of consumer who tends to
transact with your debit card
with some frequency.
You start the day with $10
in your checking account,
and you go to Starbucks
to buy a $5 latte.
Then you go to let's say
IKEA to buy a $100 couch.
Well, by the time you're IKEA
transaction has been processed,
you've overdrawn your account,
which means you're liable for
an overdraft fee for
your IKEA transaction.
What banks did though and were
able to do since we did not
have and still do not have
a real-time payment
structure in this country,
is they reordered the processing
of your transactions.
So they first process
your IKEA transaction,
depleting your checking account
entirely and then they
process your Starbucks
transaction.
So what chronologically should
be one overdraft incident,
now thanks to the processing
order that the bank has
selected has become two
expensive overdrafts.
Practices like these
resulted in overdraft
being a very significant
source of revenue for
financial institutions and
one they relied on with
the great success for their
debit card using customers.
In the aftermath of the crisis,
popular attention
focused significantly
on overdraft as
a nefarious bank practice.
There were a series of
New York Times articles
that lamented the
fact that consumers
would regularly pay $40 for
their morning latte
rather than $5,
when they incurred
a $35 overdraft fee
attached to their
$5 debit purchase.
This is again especially
troubling as
a distributional matter.
Only 10 percent of consumers
are responsible for
around 85 percent of overdraft
revenue that's generated.
This means that, there are
frequent overdrafters,
those who overdraft
with great regularity,
tend to subsidize
the existence of things
like free checking accounts
for the rest of us.
These consumers are
disproportionately low income,
less financially sophisticated,
prone to the kind of mistakes
that result in overdraft.
But also, mechanically more
likely to overdraft because
they simply have less funds
in their checking accounts.
Concerned about
overdraft as a practice,
also related to the fact
that people simply did not
realize that they were about to
overdraw and bear
these expensive fees.
Around 70 percent of customers
who were surveyed reported
that they wish that these
transactions had been declined,
rather than completed with
the significant overdraft fee.
In response, what
regulators chose
to do in the aftermath
of the crisis,
was change the default
rules around overdraft.
Prior to the financial crisis,
100 percent of consumers
were basically
automatically opted into
overdraft protection,
as it is referred to
again rather ironically,
which means that they're
eligible for incurring
these overdraft fees
when they overdraw
their accounts either
by transacting,
or by withdrawing
money from the ATM,
that they don't actually have
sufficient funds to cover.
In the aftermath of
the crisis before
the banks are able to levy
these overdraft fees,
consumers are now
required to affirmatively
opt in to banks
overdraft protection..
This has reduced the share
of customers that are even
capable of incurring overdraft
fees from 100 percent,
so essentially all of
US bank customers,
to around 15 percent
of customers,
and decreased overdraft revenues
substantially for
financial institutions.
The largest financial
institutions
who realized that overdraft is
a notorious product and
that these practices are
frowned upon by their customers
and much more broadly,
responded to this regulation
by embracing it and even
going beyond the requirements
of the new default rules.
In some instances, by
eliminating overdraft entirely
as a product and no longer
charging consumers high costs,
instead declining these
transactions if they occur.
Some banks offer instead
for consumers the ability
to rewind expensive overdrafts,
not charging consumers
a high overdraft fee if they're
able to replenish
their accounts within 24 hours,
and cover the cost of the
transaction that they had made.
Concerned observers of
the debit card industry
and overdraft in particular,
suggests that the new opt in
rules haven't actually
gone far enough.
This is a point made by
legal academics
like Lauren Willis,
Ryan Bubb, and Richard Pildes.
These academics point out that,
if you look to see
the consumers who have
affirmatively opted into
banks overdraft protection,
they are disproportionately
the low-income,
less financially
sophisticated consumers,
who tended to generate
the most overdraft revenue
in the previous era.
The interpretation of these
legal academics of this fact,
is that financial
institutions are
aggressively targeting
low income consumers
for opting into overdraft
because these are
the consumers that actually
generate overdraft revenue
for the bank.
An alternative explanation
for the fact that
these customers tend to opt
in to overdraft protection,
is that these customers simply
like overdraft as a product and
appreciate the ability
to be able to complete
their transactions without having
to find another means of payment,
things like going
to a payday lender
to be able to withdraw
the funds they need,
to let say get groceries for
their children that evening.
The series of critics around
overdraft protection that
Bubb, Pildes, Willis,
set of critiques advocate that
essentially in the new
overdraft default rules,
you're pitting very sophisticated
financial institutions
against unsophisticated
consumers.
So no matter what
default rules you set,
the large financial institutions
are inevitably going to
prevail because they are
much more sophisticated actors
in this setting.
These academics suggest that
what we need in overdraft
is to ban this predatory
practice altogether,
and instead no longer
allow banks to
offer overdraft protection
for consumers,
since there are
other cheaper alternatives
available to consumers to
get access to these funds,
albeit alternatives that
might be less desirable
because they take longer
to try and initiate,
things like calling
up your bank and
setting up an overdraft
line of credit.
An alternative to the approach
advocated by critics
of overdraft who say
that the default rules
haven't gone far enough
and we should ban
the product altogether,
is to simply alert consumers to
the high cost of overdrafting in
the moment before
they actually make
the decision to bear
an overdraft fee.
We know that disclosure generally
tends to be complicated and
less useful as an intervention
with respect to consumers.
Because no one really reads
their long contract with
a financial institution,
which lists on Page 28 of
37 that they're likely to
bear an overdraft fee of $30,
if they overdraft their account.
So that kind of disclosure is
not going to be effective,
but the kind of disclosure that
can be effective is alerting
consumers when they're inline
buying their Starbucks
in the morning,
that if they complete
this transaction with
their debit card there in
fact likely to incur
a $35 overdraft fee.
Since consumers who bear
overdraft fees disproportionately
report that they
would rather those
transactions had been
declined than
completed with a fee,
this would discourage
overdrafting
by the consumers who
don't actually want
to complete those transactions
and would prefer
to pay with a different
means of payment,
or not get their latte
that morning at all,
but still allow
the availability of
overdraft for consumers
who rely on it
as a means of being
able to complete
purchases that they wouldn't
be able to otherwise.
I call this approach a salience
shock for consumers
and have in mind
a text message that
you would receive when
you're in that line at
Starbucks telling you that,
"If you pay with
your debit card and complete
this transaction is going to
charge a high overdraft fee."
I have reason to believe
that this will be
an effective way of discouraging
overdraft incidence.
In the UK, they've
adopted such an approach,
where they alert consumers
via text message when
their account balances
are getting low and
overdraft fees are
likely to be incurred,
and they find that
this approach decreases
overdraft incidence by
around 25 percent for consumers.